What  is  the  anti-corruption  legal  framework in Romania?
The main legislative acts that govern corruption offences in Romania are: The Romanian Criminal Code ;Law  no.  78/2000  on  the  prevention,  discovery  and  punishing  of  corruption  acts ;Act ratifying the United Nations Convention against Corruption, adopted in New York on October 31, 2003;Act ratifying the Criminal Convention on Corruption, adopted in Strasbourg on 27 January 1999;Act ratifying the Civil Convention on Corruption, adopted in Strasbourg on November 4, 1999.
What are the main corruption offences in Romania?
Romanian criminal law distinguishes between four categories of corruption offences: a) bribery (art.289 –passive bribery), bribery  giving (art.  290 –active  bribery), influence  peddling (art.291) and buying influence (art.292).
Who can be guilty of bribery in Romania?
In the Romanian Criminal Code, the author can only be a public servant. The act described in article 289 paragraph 1 committed by a public servant (as  described  in  article  175, paragraph  1  of the RCC) is considered an offence only when committed in connection with the failure, delay of the fulfilment of their duties regarding a legal act, or in connection with performing an act contrary to these duties. Moreover, in the 2nd paragraph of article 289, bribery is stipulated as an attenuated version of the crime, if the author is a person associated with a public servant and, according to article 308 of the RCC, the punishment being lowered by a third of the period of imprisonment provided for the crime stipulated in article 289 paragraph 1.
What is the punishment for bribery in Romania?
The  main punishment for acts which fall in the material element of bribery offence may be imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. Article  289 paragraph 3 states that, in addition to the main penalty, a complementary penalty of prohibition of exercising the right to hold public office or to exercise the profession or activity in performance of which the offender has committed the act, for a period of 1 to 5 years. In the version incriminated by Law no.78/2000, the act is punishable with the penalty provided by art. 289 of the Criminal Code, whose limits are increased by one third, thereby reaching the limits of punishment from 4 years to 13 years and 4 months.
What is the punishment for giving bribes in Romania?
The promise, the giving or the offering of money or other benefits in the conditions provided under Article 289 shall be punishable by no less than 2 and no more than 7 years of imprisonment.
What is influence peddling?
Influence peddling is defined as soliciting, receiving or accepting the promise of money or other benefits, directly or indirectly, for oneself or for another, committed by a person who has influence or who alleges that they have influence over a public servant and who promises they will persuade the latter perform, fail to perform, speed up or delay the performance of an act that falls under the latter’s professional duties or to perform an act contrary to such duties and is punishable by no less than 2 and no more than 7 years of imprisonment.
What is the offence of buying influence?
Buying influence is the promise, the supply or the giving of money or other benefits, for oneself or for another, directly or indirectly, to a person who has influence or who alleges they have influence over a public servant to persuade the latter perform, fail to perform, speed up or delay the performance of an act that falls under the latter’s professional duties or to perform an act contrary to such duties and is punishable by no less than 2 and no more than 7 years of imprisonment and the prohibition to exercise certain rights.
Do the Romanian laws also cover extra-territorial corruption?
Both acts entirely committed in our country, as well as those that have been initiated in the country and completed abroad or started those initiated abroad and completed in Romania will fall under the influence of Romanian criminal law. Acts which have not been committed in Romania, but whose results occurred in our country will also fall under Romanian criminal law.
Which local authorities are responsible for corruption investigations?
The National Anticorruption Directorate (DNA) is a criminal investigation body specialized in combating corruption, created as a necessary tool in detecting, investigating and bringing to court cases of medium and high corruption. DNA is independent in its relations with the courts and with the prosecutor’s offices attached to them, as well as in its relations with other public authorities, exercising its duties under the law and only for its enforcement.
Are there whistle-blower regulations?
Article 19 of Law no. 682/2002 on witnesses’ protection stipulates that a person who is a witness in a criminal cause and has committed a serious crime if before or during the criminal investigation phase or trial phase, denounces and facilitates the identification of others who have committed such crimes or helps the judicial bodies to be held such persons criminally liable, will have the punishment limits reduced to half. On March 2015, the Romanian Constitutional Court decided that this legislative solution is unconstitutional, because it excludes from this benefit a person who is a witness and did not commit a serious crime, extending therefore the applicability of the legal text for all categories of offenders. In addition, Law no. 78/2000 sets up a legal obligation for the persons with control duties who must notify the criminal investigation bodies on any data or clues that an unlawful operation or act which can attract criminal liability under this law was performed. Moreover, failure to fulfil this obligation represents an offence.
Are there voluntary disclosure / self-reporting programmes and procedures?
In Romania, self-reporting is regulated as a particular impunity cause within the offences of giving bribery and buying influence. According to article 290 paragraph 3 RCC, the bribe giver shall not be punishable if he reports the action prior to the criminal investigation bodies be notified thereupon. Likewise, article 292 para. 2 stipulates that the perpetrator shall not be punishable if they report the action prior to the criminal investigation bodies be notified thereupon. The particular impunity cause if the following conditions are met: a) The briber/purchaser of influence must report the criminal act; b) The denunciation must be made before the criminal body is notified. Article 290 paragraph 3, as well as Article292 paragraph 2 provisions, are designed to prevent bribery offence by creating, for those who would be tempted to take bribes, the fear that they will be denounced. In this case, the money, valuables or any other assets will be given back to the briber/purchaser of influence if they were given following the denunciation.
